+++
title = "Lint Markdown files with markdownlint in GitHub Actions"
description = """\
                Gone are the chaotic days of incongruous Markdown files. \
                Enforce a consistent style with markdownlint.\
              """
date = "2024-10-01"

[extra.meta]
type = "article"
keywords = "markdownlint, markdownlint-cli2, Markdown, lint, Continuous Integration, CI, GitHub Actions"
+++

Sometimes I wonder... am I the only one with this <small>tiny little</small>
obsession for consistency in how I write *Markdown* files? Hell no! See the
folks behind [markdownlint](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint), they
definitely have the same itch. With this linter and its
[CLI](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint-cli2), gone are the chaotic
days of incongruous *Markdown* files. Now, I can sleep better again, and you can
too! <small>(Not based on scientific evidence... but who knows?)</small>

Don't go sleep yet though, let's start lintin' those pesky *Markdown* files with
*markdownlint*. You'll even see how this can be nicely added to a project's
continuous integration (CI) with *GitHub Actions*.

## 1, 2, 3 ― Lint!

You don't run before you walk, ehm... I mean you don't lint *Markdown* files
before you install *markdownlint*'s CLI:

```bash
npm install markdownlint-cli2@0.14.0 --global
```

Done? Great! In a repository with some *Markdown* files, execute this command to
lint them all:

```bash
markdownlint-cli2 '**/*.md' '#vendor'
````

In the snippet above, I showcase how you can exclude a directory. Any file under
the `vendor` directory won't be linted. You can omit this part if you don't need
it.

Now you tell me *"What's the point of having a tool if I cannot make it my
own?"*. After all, it's your files and repositories, your rules! Just put them in
`.markdownlint.yml`...

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
```yaml
# Default state for all rules
default: true

# Trailing punctuation in headings
MD026:
  # The following punctuation characters aren't accepted in headings
  # This differs from the default configuration by accepting exclamation marks in headings
  punctuation: ".,;:。，；："
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable -->

And if this isn't enough for you... [go wild with the
rules](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint/blob/main/doc/Rules.md), the
world is yours!

## Time for a Bit of (GitHub) Action(s)

So you have a *GitHub* repository, maybe two or even more (*impressive!*), and they
all got some *Markdown* files you want to lint? It's your lucky day ― automate
this with a sweet continuous integration built with *GitHub Actions*. Create the
file `.github/workflows/lint.yml` with this *YAML*:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
```yaml
name: Lint

on:
  # Run this workflow when a commit is pushed to `main`
  push:
    branches:
      - main
  # Run this workflow on any PR targeting `main`
  pull_request:
    branches:
      - main

jobs:
  lint:
    runs-on: ubuntu-24.04
    steps:
      # https://github.com/actions/checkout
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      # https://github.com/actions/setup-node
      - uses: actions/setup-node@v4
      - name: Install CLI for markdownlint
        run: npm install markdownlint-cli2@0.14.0 --global
      - name: Lint Markdown files, while excluding anything under the node_modules directories (which is generated by `npm install` above)
        run: markdownlint-cli2 "**/*.md" "#node_modules"
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable -->

Every commit pushed to `main` and PRs targeting `main` will now lint *Markdown*
files automatically in your continuous integration. Automation is the best!

## A Bit Too Eager?

Maybe *markdownlint* is sometimes a bit too trigger-happy? Calm it down for a
few lines, like in this example below:

```markdown
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
Markdown which doesn't satisfy some *markdownlint* rule(s).
<!-- markdownlint-enable -->
```

## Do You Even Lint?

Yes, you do now! Linting *Markdown* files, then having this run with *GitHub
Actions*, it's awesome. Keep those files in check, while I <small>subtly</small>
go to bed... I did hint about getting a better sleep now 🥳. But in all
seriousness, enjoy your day!
